Hello and welcome to the Idaho Reports podcast. I'm Logan Finney. Joining us this week is Senator Jim Woodward from district one in North Idaho. Thanks for joining us.
You bet. Logan. Thank you.
So I want to talk to you this week about a number of things, but let's start off first with the Budget Committee. That's kind of the thing everybody's waiting for at this point in session. You're the vice chairman on the Senate side of that committee. How is progress in the Budget committee going?
Well, I think it's a little bit slower than normal. And part of that is, as we are voting on some of these budgets now and getting them sent out to the House and Senate. They're not progressing as fast as we like. They're not being produced. I think that there's some, a hold up in the legislative services office drafting.
Not not a fault of their own, but just due to the sheer volume. If you've seen the numbers this year, we're way over our averages. We've over the last five years, we have been going up every year, and we have some prolific, a proliferation of ideas. And, so I think that in the future, we may have to just, figure out we can't limit these elected officials as to how many proposals they want to bring, but we might need to have some kind of discussion about what is a reasonable, rational number.
There have been some, legislators who brought 70 pieces of legislation to 50 pieces. So I think just between two of them, if you look at to, somebody if the average legislator brought 660 pieces of legislation, we would have 6000 proposals on the table. And just that's not going to work.
Sure. Yeah. I've seen some of those numbers from the legislative Services office. We have just a bigger number of bills that have been introduced this year than the last couple. So you're saying that that volume is just that increased workload is making it take longer for budgets to make it out of the committee.
That's part of well, to to get to this, House and Senate floor. We also have a budget process that, is different than it has been in the past. We went about 50 years with a very standardized process, and a few years ago, I was not in the legislature at the time. I had my little two years, hiatus.
The the system was switched over and to make a distinction between the ongoing budget expenses and then any what we call enhancements, although it that that word implies there's extra sometimes an enhancement might be that you're replace a vehicle. It's worn out but you don't do it every year. And so you put that in the budget. Or it might be, bulletproof vests for ISP, for the State Patrol.
Those I believe the the life on those is seven years somewhere in that time frame. And so periodically you have to buy new, bulletproof vests. And so we don't keep that in the budget on a year to year basis. But we have to look at it as an enhancement to the budget. And so with those two broken out, there there's somewhat of a thought process that we we have to do the base budget, but anything of anything in the enhancement budget is above and beyond.
And I don't know that that's really the case. And so that's where some of the, the contention is has come. Is it it's much more difficult to pass those budgets, those enhancement budgets now, because they're ripe for the picking when you, have an organization like the Freedom Foundation that scores bills and anything that's considered extra spending or enhanced spending is a negative.
We had a lot of legislators that respond to the the if scoring. And so the case is it makes it very tough to to do some of the business of the state of Idaho to serve the people of Idaho.
And that's part of the pitch of those. So they're they're called the maintenance budgets. Those ten really big ones is it's enough to keep the lights on and service at the same level as it, as it was before. Like you referenced, you had a, you had a term off, in, in the middle there where this changeover kind of happened.
Now that you're back on the budget committee, is it also a case where the, the, the ideological makeup of the committee is a little different than it has been in the past. My impression from outside is that there are, some pretty considerably more conservative, more fiscally conservative wanting to cut things out of the budget. Members on that committee than there had been in the past.
Do you think that's a factor?
Well, I'll argue that fiscally conservative is making an investment in our future. And so that many education budget, some of the other budgets we take on. So I'm not sure that I don't I try to stay away from the word conservative when we have people who are just voting no on every budget, regardless of what it is.
But yes, the makeup of the legislature as a whole and makeup of the committee is certainly different.
Okay. We'll move away from the budget committee, but another funding and finance issue that you've been working on in your time at the state House is the public school funding formula. It's been described as antiquated, out of date. I mean, it's older than I am. Talk to me about, the changes that you've been working on and the conversations you've been having with Superintendent Debbie Critchfield.
The other policymakers, like Senator Dan Hartog, representative Horman, this is an issue that's been around for a long time. What sort of progress have we made so far this year?
Well, the funding formula, I think, dates back to 1994. And, so, yes, relative to your time on the planet here. And it that funding formula takes into account a notional classroom and we so we have a table of divisors entitled 33, the funding formula. This is the money we're sending from the state to all of our K-12 public schools.
And that we just we have the ability now to to fund with higher in higher resolution just to pick up the, take a closer look and send the money to a to let the money follow the child. That is the idea that with a weighted student funding formula that we proposed this year in Senate Bill 1096 is that we can see we already know the student populations and a student who lives in a rural area.
It might take a little bit more to educate a student who has special education needs. It takes more to, to educate. And all of this is going back to our Idaho Constitution that says that the legislature has a duty to establish and maintain and the system of schools. And the word in there is uniform there. Yeah.
And so we're trying to provide that education. And if we have the ability and a weighted student funding formula to send the money where it needs to go, then that I think that will serve us better. Now, the history of changing the student funding formula goes back almost a decade now. And there have been many attempts. And every time we get into changing the how the money flows, then you have winners and losers.
One school district may pick up, 1st May lose. So what we did, we believe in that idea. The weighted student funding formula and the money following the child. And so the proposal, is, is to take just a portion of the student funding formula and try it out and start to get some buy in and some comfort with it.
And so, of the $3.3 billion in the student, in the K-12 student or K-12.
Net public school support.
I think you first forecast all.
All reading a lot of budgets this week.
Yeah. So of the 3.3 billion, about 13% of that is what we call discretionary, the rest of it is all already tied to sections of code. And, and then we have a portion that 13% is what school districts can work with to meet their needs. And to in their circumstances. And so we, we, focused our attention on just that portion of the budget.
We came up with a weighted student funding formula. It and with those weights, we can always go in and change those weights also. But the idea being, that we give more local decision making, because we send that pot of discretionary money out, but we send it based on who the students are in that school district or in that education, local education agency.
And what we refer to sometimes. So, 1096 we Senate Bill 1096, we got through the Senate Education Committee, the Senate floor, and it is stalled out in the House and has not had a hearing. I'd like to see that move forward. But there's, anytime we get into this, it seems we we not only talk about policy, but we talk about politics.
And when politics prevails over policy, that's a real challenge. It gets pretty frustrating. And I think that's where we are right now. On both Senate Bill 1096 and Senate Bill 1095, which was another bill that I sponsored. That's going back to put in code what we what we have done two years in a row. So the last two years, in the 2023 legislative session, the 2024 legislative session, we, put in an extra amount of money on the teacher career ladder.
So the money that is allocated to teachers in the school districts, and that was in intent language. So. So it came with the budget bill in the pages that follow the budget bill. But it was not put into Idaho law and title 33, where the career ladder is the.
Education code title.
Exactly. And so we put together a bill to reflect what had been done two years in a row and passed it through the Senate, education, Senate. Floor. And that was an education bill in regards to the section of code that is education. It went to the House and the co-chair of Jay Fact grabbed hold of that. And so it's sitting in House appropriations.
It's uncommon for the, the Finance Committee, the Appropriations Committee, usually you guys operate together as the joint committee. But I've seem to notice there are several policy related bills that have ended up in house appropriations specifically this year. Is it is this an ongoing symptom of the disagreement between House and Senate leaders that we've seen, or is this something more specific to the school funding formula?
That's a tough nut to crack.
Well, I think that the, cochairman wants to make sure that the decision making reflects her thought process. And so and one way to do that is to hold on to bills that somebody else has put through the process. And that's what's going on right now.
Is there any hope of breaking that logjam before, whenever the end of session is going to be this year?
Well, depends on how it when this goes out on the air and if she hears this or not.
Okay. Well, I'll go ask her about it. We'll see if we have an update. Another bill you have been putting a lot of work on has to do with wildfires, specifically creating a standard of care for electric utilities. So this is an instance where it is, in theory, electric utilities fault that a fire has sparked, because of their transmission lines or whatever.
You you told me about the bill.
So the Wildfire Standard of Care Act is, is something we're trying to avoid a situation that's, coming up in other states. And the wildfire season in the summer is difficult. And so what we're trying to do is, is define what an electric utility must do to, meet a standard of care. And if once with by defining a standard of care, we're saying this is what you have to do as an electric utility.
And the way we do that is, that each utility will write a plan, and then we'll bring that to the state level at the Public Utility Commission, have a review of that plan. And then if the plan is approved, then if there's an incident where a fire happens and if, we can take a look at what the liability is based on whether or not the plan was, it was met and whether or not there's negligence.
And so, in simple terms, we're trying to avoid this scenario where a handful of folks get to sue and bankrupt the utility, and they go off to live in the Bahamas, and the rest of the ratepayers are left footing the bill because not only did they get reimbursed for their house or any other damages, economic damages, but it goes above and beyond that to non-economic damages, emotional type, recovery.
So we're trying to be able to continue to provide safe, reliable and affordable power. That's what the electric utilities do. They exist to serve our communities and we have to distinguish it. You don't have a choice with an electric utility. There are defined service territories. And so we're in this situation. It's, playing the handle. We have a utility, one utility to choose from.
If your neighbor chooses to bankrupt that utility, should you then pay for that the rest of the time you're a customer with that utility.
Because as we're setting up this policy, it would have to it would have to be something that applies not to just the big behemoths like Idaho Power or Avista. This would also apply to a small city that runs its own electrical grid, or, user, munis, a user electrical co-op, somebody that doesn't have the resources of an Idaho Power.
Well, that's exactly it. And even in the big companies, we saw it in California. PG and E went down. They were bankrupt after the 2019 Paradise Fire. Now, in that case, I believe they were determined, negligent, negligent because of lack of maintenance on their lines. But, but whether it's a our largest power provider in the state or our smallest, the same scenario exists at the rate payers have to pay.
And so we're trying to get this get define, define ahead of time what the responsibility is to the community with we've taken on that risk. We have put power lines up and we know that that's an energy source. If you have perfectly maintained power lines and the utility has not done anything negligent, but a storm comes through, do we put that fault on the utility or do we have to take that all on as ourselves through our insurance, at a community level?
Exactly that. Yep.
So if this bill does pass into law, it would be, the the new way of the world would be if the utilities would submit a wildfire mitigation plan. And then if a fire did occur, as long as they can demonstrate they reasonably were following that mitigation plan, they're protected from liability. Is that is that a fair way of putting it?
I think everything's accurate except for protect it from liability, because the bill still allows for recovery of economic damages. And even in certain cases, our existing it goes into existing code and which still which allows for economic, and non-economic in some cases and punitive in other cases. So we're still we're utilizing the existing code, not making a new, exemption from liability, but just defining at a time what the expectations are.
As we're talking on Tuesday afternoon, this bill has made it, this version of the bill has made it through the Senate. It took a couple tries. What are its prospects in the House now?
Well, first, I'll speak to the couple tries because, yes, it's going over to the house and it'll be heard in House State affairs tomorrow morning. The what is it? What was the impetus for this bill in the first place? Well, it goes back to 2023 with a governor's wildfire summit, and we had a recommendation out of the summit, plus a lot of working groups afterward.
And a report from, that said we need to address this is concern number two and wildfire here in the state of Idaho. And so that was our task because, the utilities across the state to figure out how to, to address that. And so here we are. We spent a year drafting, working with all with a large number of attorneys and then and had all had stakeholders involved.
We that second attempt at the Senate, to get it across the Senate floor was because, communications had broken down a little bit. And so we, got to a certain point, stalled, and then, got everybody back in the room, addressed the concerns of about 95% of or 95% of the concerns.
No such thing as a perfect bill.
That's right. And and then we're able to bring that back across the floor. We had, good solid vote. We had 24 votes out of 35. So almost a 70% approval to bring in across the Senate. And we had it sent on.
And then how state affairs house.
Yeah. So it will be heard in House State affairs and then hopefully on up to the House floor.
Okay. Well, by the time listeners are listening to this, that that'll, we'll have, we'll have some coverage of what happened to that bill. Yes. And how state affairs. Another issue that you've worked on, this is a bill that is not expected to move forward. It's just been introduced as a discussion piece. And you worked with representative Mark solder, also from district one.
You guys introduced a health exemption for the state's abortion ban. Talk to me about why you brought that policy forward. And my understanding is it's some pretty specific North Idaho issues that you're looking to address, so.
You bet. And I want to first give credit to representative solder for all the work he's put into this. We've printed this bill in the Senate, so my name shows up first. But he has spent, a lot of time on this, and, and what deal? And we're talking with many people to try and come to the point that maybe we could move something forward.
We did acknowledge that at this late in the session, we wanted to just we were trying to start the conversation again. And so that Bill specifically addresses fetal anomalies, and, and then life of mother versus health of mother. And so, oh, the goal is wanted to acknowledge that there are complications in pregnancy and the Idaho code that we have right now, I'm not sure that we're quite in the right spot.
And that and and so that is evidenced in Legislative District one, which is minor, and Boundary County. So when we start from the Canadian border and come down as far as Coeur d'Alene, that's about 100 miles. There's not an ObGyn to be found. And so for for a family, a woman with her family to go through a pregnancy right now and even live north of Bonners Ferry, it's easily an hour and a half drive for a routine wellness check.
And that's either driving to Coeur d'Alene, over to Montana, or over to Washington.
Not to mention some sort of emergency.
That's exactly it. And so if we're just doing a routine wellness check, but, and it takes an hour and a half at the same time to get there in an emergency, then we're very good chance, that we're going to be delivering alongside the road. In fact, the emergency services have acknowledged that and have conducted more training.
Oh, well.
Because they they realize that they may be called to deliver a baby alongside the road. As someone who's headed to a hospital.
So this would make some tweak that the bill is not moving forward as my understanding, but if it did, it would make some tweaks that your intention is to make doctors more comfortable staying in the state. Is that the intention here?
That is a big part of it. And that's where I was. I was headed and got off on a different piece, but we don't have those OB gyns here because they're not comfortable working here in Idaho. You talk about someone who spent 12 years to become a medical professional. They have good judgment and they're making a judgment about themselves, their ability to offer to practice.
They have families. And when we put the threat of a felony in front of someone when they're making a medical decision, that that's hard. And so, I think that instead they're making a decision up front that Idaho is not the right place. We have the lowest number of doctors per capita in the nation. So we're helping to drive that, number down some more.
We we just need to acknowledge, the situation that whether we think that the, the existing code is okay or not, and we think it would hold up, hold up in a court challenge, the reality on the street and in the hospitals and in the doctor's offices is that they're uncomfortable with it. We trust them with our lives, but we don't trust them to make this decision about a, complication during pregnancy.
In that introductory hearing, I was very struck by, we had Senator Shippy, who's a pretty hard line, anti-abortion, person. He has introduced similarly an abortion bill that's not going to move, but that would get rid of get rid of the rape, incest exemptions under the existing code. And he said even though he disagrees with the fundamental premises of how the abortion law is set up right now, he saw your bill as in line with the existing framework.
What what was your reaction to hearing that from him?
I was surprised and happy. If we can have that conversation, that's wonderful.
Another North Idaho specific issue. This is one that I'm really excited about, having grown up on the shores of Lake Ponderay, Lake Ponderay, that northern lake and Bonner County is controlled by, Albany Falls Dam, which is a structure under the control of the Army Corps of Engineers. Talk to me about the lake. Talk to me about the dam.
What's the issue with the dam? And how are the government? How are the feds? Not doing so well getting getting it taken care of.
But we have two pieces going on there. Two issues going on. One is the shorter term repair of the Albany Falls Dam flood gates. About a year and a half or two years ago now, there was a there were defects discovered in the flood gates. And there are ten of those flood gates, plus one spare. Right now the one is off being repaired.
And so they've changed the, that put essentially put the dam in an emergency status because they've changed their operational, guidelines, but they're not treating it like an emergency. The the dam, the powerhouse, the substation, all of those were built in about a four year period, I think in the early, early 1950s. And they're talking about, replacing those gate structures at one point.
And it was a discussion of 20 years.
Oh, goodness.
Yeah. And now we've got I think it's down to maybe it is it'll be six, seven years like something like that to replace those. But it's kind of like saying I can build a car in, in a few weeks, but it's going to take me a year to change the tires. When the tires come, do when they're worn out.
And so we've been trying to put the pressure on. We need to fix this faster. I think that we're moving in that direction. I'm not sure that they're totally convinced yet how fast they can move, but we'll we'll continue to push. So that's the, the more, emergent issue, but the longer term issue that we've dealt with is the agreement on lake level lake water levels that goes back to when the dam was put in place.
There was an A, there were hearings in the United States Senate. There's a document that describes what the agreements were. The dam is operated for multiple purposes, and that's navigation, fisheries, flood control, recreation and power production. And each one of those has an ideal operating curve. If you look at the level over the course of the year, we call that an operating curve.
And that's the level of how how much water is in the lake at a given time. Yes.
And so the lake on it fluctuates about 11ft based on what the Army Corps is doing with it. But each one of those curves is different. And so then you have to come up with a compromise between those five curves and say, here's how we're going to operate. And right now, we're where the original intention was that the lake would be at that full high pool roughly half the year.
We're at full pool about two and a half months of the year.
Only two and a half.
Two and a half? Oh, yeah. It's about two and a half months of the year. And and so that creates access issues year round. And part of that is access issues for emergency services. So right now if you're familiar with Sandpoint you come in, you get your big long bridge moment. If the for the first time you come to Sandpoint and right, you're running close to the highway bridge is a train bridge.
And so one of the scenarios that you have to deal with is if a train ever derailed off that and fell into the lake, you have to respond to that. The state has provided some emergency equipment, oil booms and other emergency response equipment, in the northern area. And to deploy that in the summertime at full pool is simply a few minutes away at City Beach, and you can drag those oil booms out and start to deal with that issue.
In the wintertime, you'd have to drive around the halfway around the perimeter of the lake, go clear to Hope, Idaho, and then drag all that equipment back across the lake. It might take a day to respond. So that's an issue that we we don't have the ability to respond to potential emergencies. Of course, the the economic impact to Sandpoint, which is, that partially a tourism economy.
Certainly.
Yeah. And and the people who own waterfront homes are paying taxes on waterfront homes. But a good portion of the year, those are mudflat homes. They're on the north end of the lake, in particular the water with that much of a vertical drop in water. The water can be out 2 or 3 or 400ft from their.
Homes, and that's some pretty thick clay on a lot of that.
That's right. And so there are a lot of aspects to it. And we think that the lake levels, that the system can be operated differently. This is all part of the system from the reservoir in Montana through, Whitefish Lake into Ponderay, with Clark Fork coming in Ponderay and then on down to Portland. But, we think that that system can be operated differently, and we're going to or in progress in progress on an economic study.
And then we'll also look at a hydrologic study to, to say, provide some options how that might be run.
And I do want to note that the water rights for the Northern Lakes, Priest Lake, Lake Ponderay, Lake, Coeur d'Alene, those are held nominally by the governor for recreation purposes and for the benefit of the health of the state. So is it a matter here of just putting more pressure on the Army Corps to be operating a dam in the way that the locals prefer?
Is it that they're prioritizing other issues like habitat and power generation over recreation? What's the disconnect there?
Well, I think it is just an maybe just a heavy lean toward the power in. But I think that the same amount of water goes through all year round. And so you in the end, with the growing need for power, the timing of that power is not as important as it used to be. So that that dam could be operated with the water coming through at different times of the year and still make full use of, of that.
But yeah, I think that over time an institution just gravitates for one direction. And so we have to kind of break through that. The, the lake was operated, oh, maybe 10 or 15 years back at a higher level in this in the winter time, about four feet higher than what it is now. So it was maintained at a mid pool.
And that helps with all the access and utilization of the lake. So we could go back to that. That was that that was a period of time. It was operated that mid pool based on a basically an experiment for the fisheries. And I'm not sure why we didn't just stick with it.
Okay. And you're planning on writing some legislation related to this?
Well, we have had a hearing in the Senate Resources Committee where we had all the, folks involved that have kind of referred to the hydrologists, the, the economic impact study, the Lakes Commission, which is in regards to Freeston Ponderay. And we'll have a resolution. It's, it'll be heard in Senate, state. It will be printed tomorrow in Senate State Affairs.
And then we'll be back to the resources Committee with the resolution to provide some information to, at the federal level, to the folks back there, what our thoughts are.
Okay. And just one more clarifying detail. There's been there was a different resolution having to do with a management area in East Idaho, that called for the state to take over management of that area because they're having some different water related issues. Would this be like that or not like that? It does this resolution call for the state to take over Albany Falls Dam from the feds or we're not touching?
Not necessarily. Although there it is part of that the conversation, because there is some documentation from back in the 50s that the thought process being that when the dam had paid for itself with the generation of electricity that the net could control, could revert to the state. I'm not sure we're asking that yet, but we certainly want to have more involvement in what the lake level is and how it's operated over the course of the year.
All right. Well, we will keep an eye on all of these issues. Senator Jim Woodworth, thank you for being so generous with your time this week.
Appreciate it. Thank you. Laurie.
Thanks for listening to the Idaho Reports podcast. Tune in to the Friday show at 8 p.m. on Idaho Public Television and Visit Idaho Reports. Talk to stream episodes and keep up to date with the events of the 2025 legislative session.