Album caption: Group of all the members of the Survey, made while in camp at the Red Buttes, junction of the North Platte and Sweetwater. Standing left to right: John "Potato John" Raymond and "Val"; cooks; S.R. Gifford, landscape painter and guest; H.W. Elliott, artist; James Stevenson, assistant; H.D. Schmidt, naturalist; C.P. Carrington, zoologist; L.A. Bartlett, general assistant; W.H. Jackson, photographer. Sitting left to right: C.S. Turnbull, secretary; J.H. Beaman, meteorologist; F.V. Hayden, geologist in charge; Cyrus Thomas, agriculturist; Raphael ...., hunter; A.L. Ford, mineralogist. Natrona County, Wyoming. August 24, 1870.

Index card unavailable. See also: jwh00283.

Descriptive Catalog of the Photographs of the United States Geological Survey of the Territories, W. H. Jackson, Photographer, Second Edition, Illustrated, 1870 Series, page 14, No. 80 caption, A group of all o the members of the survey, made while in the camp at Red Buttes.

Personal email communication from Alan Terrell on February 11, 2021, "The most interesting image taken in 1870, in my view, is that of the camp and 15 primary participants at Red Buttes. This is image jwh00282. jwh00283 is very similar, but not as "clean" with regard to persons in the photograph.  Also taken at the same location was image jwh00278.  These images were most likely taken on August 24, but could have been taken on August 23.  Here are the diary entries that pertain to these images:
 
On August 23, Jackson writes:  "Crossing of the North Platte at Casper.  Over long his & down the steep one.  Estimate of distances.  Several at camp at R.B...."
 
On August 24, Jackson writes:  "Layover.  Views of camp.  Visit to (Jackson) canyon in P.M.  Loss of developer and ride back.  Fine views of canyon, and wide view above.
 
Since Jackson and the party had a "layover" on the 24th, he had plenty of time for photographing all day without travel pressures.  This is why I think that the group photographs and broader camp photograph were most likely taken on the 24th.
 
Also pertaining to the 24th entry are images taken at what would come to be known as Jackson Canyon.  These are images jwh00279, 00869.  Also taken on this day was jwh00281, that of a view from above Jackson Canyon.  So, these 3 images were taken on August 24, 1870.

This USGS product is considered to be in the U.S. public domain. For further information on the USGS Information Policies and Instructions, refer to the Copyrights and Credits section on this web page: http://www.usgs.gov/laws/info_policies.html