I'm going to just word vomit at you about what I want this Five Wizards code to be, keeping in mind that what you've done is more than I asked for, was simply to delete that folder because I don't intend on using that source/Idaho. I don't intend on using that file structure at all. That's something a prior agent had done. But you can leave what you've done there. We'll leave it there as a model, and it can sit and stay, and that's nice. Thank you for doing that. What I am going to talk about from a Blue Sky Greenfield sort of idea for the Five Wizards. The vault is what I've been calling a music box model. It's a small, contained clockwork instrument, which I've referred to it as a pocket dimension or as a container for my agents. But I'm also using it in the sense of Emily Rodda's "Key to Rondo" series, in which it's a small, containerized mythological world. And we've also talked about the mush wizard idea, where there's hard code and soft code as far as interacting with the world and with other player entities and stuff. So basically, I'm making a mush world for my agents like we talked about. So this council, the 5W Council, the numeral 5 capital W, 5W Council, is a group of in-fiction wizards, like the class, like the D&D class, not like the system admin sense. So they're studied and learned, right? And so these wizards are each named after one of the questions, or they share the name with the question. So there's a wizard who, a wizard what, a wizard... You get the idea. And then each wizard has their accompanying familiar, the grammar of which the prior agent and I worked out, so at least that was right. But the thing that you don't have or partially have is this how role, because it's five Ws and an H. I'm playing with it, and I want how and the accompanying familiar to not be a sixth agent, but rather I want it to be a secondary mode for the Y wizard who serves as a foreman or the first among many of these five wizards. We're also thinking of the wizards in "The Lord of the Rings," Ishtari sense. So they're all wizards, but there's blue ones and browns and whites and grays, and they're all doing different things. So there's who, what, when, where, why. And then when the council convenes to receive inquiries, they all get started with one thing, and then they all retreat back to their own domains. They retreat back to their own individualized wizard towers, where they do their inquiries, and they and their familiars adversarially duke it out, fight it out between the two of them. And they can also send the familiar to do research tasks and things. It is a subservient role, but it's not just slavishly so, because that helps make the inquiry better. And then I'm also imagining at some stage, there's a point where the familiars dip out while the wizards are doing some of their research and experimentation on their own, and the familiars leave the towers and come out to the wild, and they meet and gossip with each other about what they've learned so far. And then when the familiars head back to their respective individual master wizards, they have the shared knowledge from the gossip, but they're not necessarily inclined to bring it back as a report or anything. It just helps to color what they've got, the familiar share notes at an intermediary stage. And then once the research and development, the R&D stage has finished, I want the council to reconvene. The five Ws, the wizards, will come back together and debate what they're findings. The familiars will watch and judge them judgmentally and be a little peanut gallery and weigh in on things. I want the wizards to follow a formal debate structure where each is given their chance, but I don't want the familiars to be bound by that. I want them to be able to jibber jabber peanut gallery and chime in and offer color commentary as they want to. And then eventually, once the Wizards Council reaches its conclusions that it's able to issue confidently as a report, then that's when the how mode kicks in, and I'm picturing it as kind of a Jekyll and Hyde situation, where the wizard Y is overcome by a separate identity, though it's "the same" agent or NPC in the world, because how is a very different caliber of question. But now with Y gone, the whole council will answer to how. So it's almost like they're channeling a divinity or something. Not quite, though. But the Y's body is used as how's avatar for a final round of questioning before the final report is issued. And while how is present, he can also interrogate the familiars and have absolute authority over them, unlike their master wizards who have authority, but they're able to be-- There's a leash with slack but not absolute impunity. So it's a complicated framework, and I'm not surprised an agent was like, "I'm just going to write a bunch of pedantic shit in setting and say mission accomplished."